Ultimately, the purpose behind a medical test is to influence clinical decision-making.
In this lesson, we'll build a framework for thinking about how the result of
an imaging study would influence
clinical decision-making with the goal of setting you up for future lessons.
In those lessons, you'll learn how to calculate
the diagnostic performance metrics that underpin this framework.
These metrics will serve as relevant measures of
how well your algorithms perform compared to
an established gold standard test and will quickly
communicate to potential users how effective your algorithm is.
First, let's revisit a theorem which will be familiar to many of you. Bayes' theorem.
As you may recall, Bayes' theorem describes the probability of an event
based on prior knowledge of conditions that might be related to the event.
In medicine, this will be the probability that the patient has
a given condition based on all available information.
In medicine, we express Bayes' theorem in terms of odds rather than probabilities,
partly due to the ease of calculation when
taking into account the results of a diagnostic test.
Here's the common expression.
Here is the same formula,
but I'll now flip the right and left
sides so that it's stylistically expressed in the order in
which we'd be thinking in daily circumstances so that our prior belief comes first.
Let's go through each of these terms in a high level sense.
The term prior odds reflects your prior belief about the presence of a given disease or
condition in the absence of information from the diagnostic tests in question.
Without any additional clinical information,
this usually represents the local population prevalence of a particular condition.
In medicine, we sometimes say,
if you hear hoofs outside your window,
think horses, not zebras.
This is to capture the idea that the base rate of a disease in
the population should influence your pre-test probability.
That is, unless you live in a zebra enclosure,
then it's more likely a zebra, base rates matter.
The middle term, the likelihood ratio is
a diagnostic performance metric used to determine
whether a test result usefully changes
the probability that a condition or disease is present.
We will learn how to calculate it in a later lecture.
But for now, notice that its value ranges from zero to infinity, theoretically.
With a value of one,
meaning that test result provides
no useful information and our prior belief is unchanged.
If the value is large,
we will be more confident that a disease is present and the smaller the value below one,
the less likely that disease is present.
Finally, the posterior odds reflects our belief about a disease
being present after incorporating the results of our diagnostic test.
Let's see how all of this fits in into a practical example.
We'll go over three cases and for all of these cases will be in the emergency department,
a setting in which rapid,
accurate decision-making is of the essence.
In our first case, Ms. Smith comes in with the worst headache of her life.
The emergency room provider knows
that the most common cause is going to be something like a simple headache.
But there are more dangerous causes such as intracranial hemorrhage.
That means bleeding in the brain,
and he needs to be certain.
To do so, he will order a head CT. Head CT is
obtained and the radiologist states that indeed subarachnoid hemorrhage is present.
That means there is bleeding in the brain.
Now notice, the prior belief of the emergency room physician was
that hemorrhage or any other dangerous finding was actually very low.
But because the CT is so good at picking up on bleeds and it is so specific for them,
the likelihood ratio has a very large positive value and thus
the emergency room physicians belief is now
changed such that he is certain that hemorrhage is present.
That's an example of where a positive result with
a very large likelihood ratio can tip someone from not believing something is the case,
to being almost certain that the disease is present and changing treatment accordingly.
With that information at hand,
the emergency room physician refers Ms. Smith to a neurosurgeon.
In this scenario, Ms. Smith comes in instead with new left-sided weakness,
meaning weakness of her arm and leg that came on suddenly.
Now that history is very suspicious for a stroke,
it at least needs to be ruled out and
the emergency room provider has a very high pre-test probability that it's the case.
However, because the treatment for such a disease is in no way benign,
meaning can have complications if used in the wrong context,
it needs to get a study to make sure that that's the case.
The ER doc decides to get a Brain MRI,
which is very good at picking up on the changes in the brain associated with a stroke.
The radiologists interprets the study and finds out that it's negative.
Now, even though the ER docs initial belief was that stroke was very likely,
he knows that the MRI is so good at picking up on these changes that if it's negative,
essentially the probability is near null
that a stroke is the cause of Ms. Smith's symptoms.
This is an example of where a very small value for
the likelihood ratio can tip someone from
being almost certain about a disease to essentially excluding it.
In this case, the ER doc holds often using clot busting drugs and
needs to go back to the drawing board to figure out what is going on with Ms. Smith.
Now, things aren't always so cut and dry.
In this case, Ms. Smith comes in with a headache,
but she also has a known history of breast cancer.
One of the main concerns of the ER doc in this case is,
could a metastasis be the explanation for the headache?
Meaning, has the cancer traveled to the brain?
To exclude any really dangerous causes or emergent causes explaining the headache,
start with a head CT.
The radiologists interprets the head CT saying that there
isn't any acute findings in the head CT,
though cautions that this study is not
the ideal study to look for small metastasis and they may be missed.
In this case, you can think of the likelihood ratio as
essentially a value of one for that particular disease state.
It doesn't really change our belief.
So with the results of the CT study,
the ER doc is now comfortable that there isn't
a large mass or a brain bleed causing the headache,
but still not sure whether metastasis could be present in explaining it.
Thus he moves on to the more ideal study and MRI with
contrast and thin sections to further refine the diagnosis.